# Plugins for Freelining 3
---

Freelinking 3 uses a plugin system to enhance the freelinking syntax and
enable different kinds of free linking. Plugins can be simple URL
constructors, or can use more sophisticated methods and have complete
control over the link and target text. Plugins are small include files
that live in the plugins/ directory under the freelinking module's
directory.

## Format of a Freelinking 3 plugin

Freelinking 3 plugins are PHP include files, whose name starts with
"freelinking_" and ends with the extension ".inc". For example, if you
wish to write a plugin called "mike," the file's name would be
"freelinking_mike.inc" and it would live in the plugins/ directory under
the freelinking module's directory.

A FL3 plugin only has one requirement: it must add an element to the
$freelinking global array. 

### The $freelinking array

Your plugin's element in the $freelinking array is named after your
plugin. In the example above of a plugin called "mike," the element your
plugin would add to the array would be `$freelinking['mike']`. Your
element defines an array, with the following elements:

* 'indicator'  
  The indicator is a string that defines a regular expression that will
  be used to differentiate this freelink from other freelink types. For
  our example, a good indicator value might be '/mike/'. This means that
  freelinks for this plugin will look like `[[mike:something]]`.
  Freelinking uses the colon (":") as the separator between the
  indicator and the link text. It should not be part of the indicator
  string. The indicator string is *required*.

* 'translate'  
  This is an array of characters that can be used to translate
  characters in the link text to other characters that will be used in
  the URL. The primary use case for this is to translate spaces into
  underscores or dashes as different systems require. In the example of
  our "mike" plugin, the website uses dashes instead of spaces, so we'll
  use a value for 'translate' of `array(' ' => '-')`. For reference,
  this array will be run through the PHP function
  [strtr()](http://http://us.php.net/manual/en/function.strtr.php). The
  translate array is optional.

* 'replacement'  For simple URL replacement freelinks, the 'replacement'
  is a string for the URL, where the special string '%1' gets replaced
  by the link text in the freelink. For our example, if we're going to
  http://example.com/mike/something, we'd use the replacement string
  "http://example.com/mike/%1" and our freelink text would be put in
  place of the %1. If you are using a URL replacement style of freelink,
  the 'replacement' string is *required*.

* 'callback'  
  More complex plugins can use a callback element in their array to
  define a php function that will be used to come up with the link. This
  function will be passed the entire match array of the freelink as
  $target, with the target portion of the freelink in `$target[1]`. This
  function is expected to return an html fragment (most likely a link,
  but it wouldn't have to be a link). If your plugin is not using
  'replacement,' then the 'callback' element is *required.*

So, a simple freelinking plugin only needs to include this array. Here's
our entire example:
    $freelinking['mike'] => array(
      'indicator' => '/mike/',
      'translate' => array(' ' => '-'),
      'replacement' => 'http://example.com/mike/%1',
    );

And that could be the entire (not counting comments, of course)
freelinking_mike.inc file. The example plugin
"freelining_drupalproject.inc" is a simple plugin of this type:
    $freelinking['drupalproject'] => array(
      'indicator' => '/d(rupal)?project/',
      'translate' => array(' ' => '_'),
      'replacement' => 'http://drupal.org/project/%1',
    );

### More complex plugins

The 'callback' element of your $freelinking['plugin'] array can define a
php function that will be used to create the link. This function will
get the entire match that the module found for its link, and is expected
to return a link. Freelinking will make the substition based on the
return value of this function. 

The callback function should have the name
"freelinking_<plugin>_callback", though that name is not enforced by the
freelinking module. Drupal likes modules to keep their functions within
their own namespaces, so the safest solution is to stick to this naming
convention.

Two plugins that ship with freelinking use the callback, which you can
use as examples.

* freelinking_drupalorgnid.inc  
  This plugin turns freelinks like [[donid:17570]] into "Drupal.org:
  Branches", which is linked to the node by nid. This plugin uses the
  callback function to do a `drupal_http_request` to find the title of
  the page. Therefore, this plugin can be used as an example to
  manipulate the link text.

* freelinking_nodetitle.inc  
  This plugin mimics the behavior of previous versions of freelinking.
  It attempts to find a node on the system with the same title as the
  target, and either creates a link to that content, or a link to a node
  creation form to create that content. This plugin can be used as an
  example to manipulate the link target.

### Settings

If your plugin will require some settings, they can be defined in a
"freelinking_<plugin>_settings" function in your include file. This
function should return a Drupal FormAPI array of the various settings
your plugin will need. The freelinking module will add these form
controls to the settings page (admin/settings/freelinking). Your plugin
can use these settings in the $freelinking array, or the callback
function, as necessary.

A simple example of using settings is the wikipedia plugin,
'freelinking_wikipedia.inc.' It uses one setting to control the language
code that the URL should use. The setting is used in the
$freelinking['wikipedia']['replacement'] element, using the language
code as part of the URL.

The 'freelinking_nodetitle.inc' plugin also uses the settings array,
again mimicing the behavior of previous versions of freelinking. This
plugin has settings to control what happens when a link cannot be found,
and is able to restrict the lookup of content to certain content types.
This is an example of using settings within the callback function.

---
freelining.module by ea. Farris <eafarris@gmail.com>
$Id$
vim: tw=72 syn=mkd
